[Alerting V2][Serverless & 9.5][M2] Add experimental alerting features alerts pages (#6527)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/alerting/kibana-alerting-experimental/alerts/investigate-alert-episodes.md

---
navigation_title: Investigate alert episodes
applies_to:
  stack: experimental 9.5+
  serverless: experimental
products:
  - id: kibana
description: "Investigate alert episodes in Kibana's experimental alerting system. Explore metric trends, lifecycle history, related episodes, metadata, actors, and assignment."
---

# Investigate alert episodes [investigate-alert-episodes]

> In the {{alerting-v2-system}}, the episode detail page shows the full context of an alert episode, including its metric trend, lifecycle history, related episodes, triage actions, assignee, actors, and source metadata.

Reviewer: And severity.

Author: ```suggestion
In the {{alerting-v2-system}}, the episode detail page shows the full context of an alert episode, including its metric trend, lifecycle history, related episodes, triage actions, assignee, actors, source metadata, and severity.
```

## Metric trend [metric-trend]

> For threshold-based rules, the episode detail page shows how the evaluated metric compared to the rule's threshold conditions over the episode's lifetime. Use it to understand how the condition developed: how far the metric exceeded the threshold, whether the breach was escalating or stabilizing, and how long it persisted.

Reviewer: This is not exclusive to threshold-based rules. Other ESQL-based rules where clear thresholds can be extracted from the query will also display the graph.

Author: @adcoelho it sounds like you're saying that this should be reframed to focus on what the system parses from the rule query (threshold conditions) rather than the rule type (threshold rules). If that's correct, how's this:

```suggestion
When the system can extract threshold conditions from a rule's {{esql}} query, the episode detail page shows how the evaluated metric compared to those conditions over the episode's lifetime. Use it to understand how the metric behaved relative to the threshold. For example, you can examine how far the metric exceeded the configured value, whether the metric was escalating or stabilizing, and how long the breach persisted.
```

The para after the list would need to be updated as well to:

> This section is only present when the system can parse threshold conditions from the rule's query. It doesn't appear for signal-mode rules or rules whose query doesn't contain extractable threshold comparisons.

Author: Added to current draft ^

When a rule includes multiple threshold conditions:

- Conditions that compare the **same metric** appear together, with each threshold represented separately.
- Conditions that compare **different metrics** appear in separate views, one per metric.

This section is only present when the system can parse threshold conditions from the rule's query. It doesn't appear for signal-mode rules or rules whose query doesn't contain extractable threshold comparisons.

## Related episodes by series [related-episodes]

The detail page groups related episodes into two subsections to help you distinguish between a condition recurring on one entity and a rule firing across many:

- **Same alert series:** Episodes sharing the same `rule_id` and `group_hash`. These are recurrences of the same condition on the same series. A long list here suggests the underlying issue isn't being fully resolved.
- **Other series for this rule:** Episodes from the same rule with a different `group_hash`. These show how broadly the rule is firing across other entities or conditions.

## Source event metadata [source-event-metadata]

> The metadata view surfaces field values from the source event that triggered the episode. Use it to inspect fields that aren't shown in the main detail view, such as resource identifiers or version information.

Reviewer 2: nit: we might want to specify that this is not a complete and exact representation of the source data that triggered the event, but of the data that resulted from the rule query. I.E. if in my query I do STAT ... BY I'll get the stats in the stored metadata, not all the fields of the source document. Users might expect the whole doc to be there, but they'll get whatever they compute or KEEP in the query

Author: @umbopepato if users wanted to see the full source doc, how would they do that from the metadata view? For example, should they open the alert episode in Discover or take another path?

Author: Comment is partially addressed in Addressed in [`491edf9` (this PR)](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6527/commits/491edf9a4856b978fb462f6944079245138c2f9a). [One item](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6527/changes#diff-d67683684daa3142f172272ddef83e3791e7f4561a4cc2fb2f5520dd74008c98R60) is left.

Reviewer 2: > @umbopepato if users wanted to see the full source doc, how would they do that from the metadata view? For example, should they open the alert episode in Discover or take another path?

To do that, they can use the `View in Discover` episode action that uses the same base query from the rule, aligned with the episode timeframe. From there, they can adjust the query according to what they want to see (for example if they want to see source documents instead of the aggregations output, they can just remove the aggregations part).

The updated text looks clear to me 🙂
